## Bonnie Prince Charlie

Prince Charlie was the grandson of King James II, who was driven away
from the throne of England because he was a selfish man and a bad ruler.
The young prince tried to win the crown back again. He came over to
Scotland from France, with only seven followers; but soon a great many
of the Scots joined him, for he was so gay, and handsome, and friendly,
that all who saw him loved him. They called him "Bonnie Prince Charlie".
But though the prince and his followers were very brave, they had no
chance against the well-trained soldiers of King George of England. They
won a few victories; then they were thoroughly beaten in the battle of
Culloden. Thousands of brave Scots were slain, and the prince had to fly
for his life.

After this, for many weeks, he hid among the moors and mountains from
the English soldiers who were trying to find him. He lived in small
huts, or in caves, and many times had nothing but the wild berries from
the woods to eat. Once he stayed for three weeks with a band of robbers,
who were very kind to him; and though the king offered a large sum of
money to anyone who would give him up, not one of his poor friends was
false to him.

At last, a young and beautiful Scottish lady, named Flora MacDonald,
helped him to escape. She gave him woman's clothes, and pretended that
he was her servant, called Betty Burke. Then she took him with her away
from the place where the soldiers were searching, and after a time he
reached the sea, and got safely away to France.

![Prince Charlie at the battle of Culloden](assets/il008s.jpg "Prince Charlie at the battle of Culloden" class="center")

[Prince Charlie at the battle of Culloden](assets/il008x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with Â° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
