## Nelson and Hardy

Lord Nelson was one of the greatest seamen that ever lived. He commanded
the British fleet at the battle of Trafalgar, when the navies of France
and Spain were beaten, and England was saved from a great danger. He did
not look like a famous admiral on board his ship, the _Victory_, that
day. He was a small man, and his clothes were shabby. He had lost one
arm and one eye in battle; but with the eye which remained he could see
more than most men with two, and his brain was busy planning the course
of the coming fight. Just before it began, he went over his ship, giving
orders to the crew, and cheering them with kind words, which touched the
hearts of the rough men, who loved their leader and were proud of him.
"England expects every man to do his duty" was the last message he sent
them. Every man did his duty nobly that day, though the battle was
fierce and long; but it was the last fight of the brave commander. He
was shot in the back as he walked the deck with his friend Captain
Hardy, and was carried below.

He lay dying for several hours, but, in spite of his great pain, his one
thought was of the battle. "How goes the day with us?" he asked of
Hardy; and when told that many of the enemies' ships were taken, he
cried eagerly, "I am glad. Whip them, Hardy, as they have never been
whipped before." Later, when his friend came to tell him that the
victory was won, Nelson pressed his hand. "Good-bye, Hardy!" said he, "I
have done my duty, and I thank God for it." These were the last words of
one of England's bravest sons.

![Nelson on the 'Victory' at Trafalgar](assets/il010s.jpg "Nelson on the 'Victory' at Trafalgar" class="center")

[Nelson on the 'Victory' at Trafalgar](assets/il010x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with Â° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
