## The Relief of Lucknow

During the time of the terrible Indian Mutiny, when most of the native
troops rose against their British rulers, and vowed to kill every white
person in the land, many cruel deeds were done. A great number of white
people were slain before the British troops could come to their rescue,
but in some places they managed to hold out until help reached them.
This was the case in the city of Lucknow, where the British governor
with a small body of troops, and a great many women and children, took
refuge in the Government House from a vast host of rebels who came to
attack them. Many of the brave defenders were killed by the shot and
shell of the enemy. Many others, and especially the little children,
fell sick and died, for the heat was very great, and there was no good
water to be had. Then, after many days, a small body of white soldiers
fought their way into the city, and brought help and hope to the rest of
the party. They were only just in time. Had they come a few days later
they would have found the Government House a heap of ruins, and their
friends dead, for the rebels were making a mine under the building and
meant to blow it up with gunpowder. But alas! the newcomers were not
strong enough to fight their way out of Lucknow with a crowd of helpless
women and children and sick folk, so they, too were now shut in. For two
months longer they held out. Then at last, when they had almost lost
hope, the great Sir Colin Campbell with his brave Highlanders and other
soldiers defeated the rebels, and brought the band of sick, starving,
and weary people safely away.

![The Highlanders entering Lucknow](assets/il016s.jpg "The Highlanders entering Lucknow" class="center")

[The Highlanders entering Lucknow](assets/il016x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with Â° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
