## Grace Darling

On a small rocky island, off the north coast of England, there is a
lighthouse. A man named William Darling was once keeper of this
lighthouse, and his daughter Grace lived with him. Every day Grace
Darling helped her father to trim the lamps, so that at night they might
shine brightly, and warn sailors to steer their ships away from the
dangerous rocks, upon which they would have been dashed to pieces.

One stormy night Grace woke with the sound of screams in her ears. The
screams came from the sea, so she knew that some ship must be in
distress. She roused her father, but they could see nothing in the
darkness. When daylight came, they found that a ship had been wrecked
upon the rocks some way off, and a few people were clinging to the
masts. Grace wished to go at once in a boat to save them; but at first
her father hung back, for the wind and sea were wild, and he feared
that the small boat would be overturned by the great waves. Then Grace
ran to the boat, and seized an oar, for she could not bear to let the
poor men die without trying to save them; and the father could not let
his brave, daughter go alone, so he followed, and they rowed off.

It was hard work pulling against the strong sea, and several times the
small boat was almost sunk. But at last it reached the wreck, and
William Darling managed to land upon the rock, and with great care and
skill helped the half-frozen people into the small boat. Then they were
taken to the lighthouse, where Grace warmed and fed them, until the
storm ceased, and they could return to their homes.

![Grace Darling rows out to the wreck](assets/il018s.jpg "Grace Darling rows out to the wreck" class="center")

[Grace Darling rows out to the wreck](assets/il018x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with Â° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
