## David Livingstone

At one time many people believed that the middle of Africa was a sandy
desert, where nothing could live but camels and ostriches. But they were
mistaken. The great traveller, David Livingstone, journeyed into this
unknown country, and he found that it was not a desert but a beautiful
land, where many tribes of black people dwelt. He also saw that these
people were often seized by strangers, and taken away to be sold as
slaves. This sight filled him with sadness, and he made up his mind to
put a stop to this cruel traffic. He worked hard, tracing the courses of
the rivers, finding the best tracts of land, and teaching the natives.
Then he urged his countrymen to send others after him to settle in this
fair country, to help the natives to learn useful trades, and to drive
away the slave-merchants.

For some years he was quite alone, with his black servants, in the midst
of this wild land. His friends grew anxious, and sent Mr. Stanley,
another great traveller, to look for him. Stanley marched for nearly a
year before he found Livingstone. The old explorer was white and worn
with sickness and hardship, and he was overjoyed to clasp once more the
hand of a white man, and to hear again the English tongue. But he would
not return to England. He said his work was not yet done, and he set out
once more on his travels. It was his last journey. One morning his
servants found him dead upon his bed. Since that time much has been done
to make Central Africa a prosperous land. Other white men have followed
where Livingstone led, and wherever they have settled, the wicked
slave-trade has been stopped.

![The meeting of Stanley and Livingstone](assets/il020s.jpg "The meeting of Stanley and Livingstone" class="center")

[The meeting of Stanley and Livingstone](assets/il020x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with Â° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
