## Sir Philip Sidney

When Elizabeth was Queen of England it was a time of great deeds and
great men. The queen was brave and clever herself, so she liked to have
brave and clever people around her. Great soldiers, and writers, and
statesmen went to her court; and when brave seamen came back from their
voyages to unknown lands far away, they were invited by the queen to
visit her, and tell her of all the strange places and people they had
seen. In this Elizabeth was wise, for men did their best to show
themselves worthy of her favours.

Among all the great men at court, none was more beloved than Sir Philip
Sidney. He was called "the darling of the court".

![Sir Philip Sidney °](assets/il073s.jpg "Sir Philip Sidney °" class="center")

[Sir Philip Sidney °](assets/il073x.jpg)

At that time, there was much trouble and many wars in some other
countries, where people were fighting for the right to worship God in
their own way. Philip Sidney heard of these things when he was a boy in
his father's house, and his heart was stirred with pity. Later, when he
was in France, a great number of people were cruelly killed because they
would not pray in the way which the king ordered. Sidney never forgot
the dreadful sights and sounds of that sad time, and when Queen
Elizabeth sent an army to help the people of Holland, who were fighting
for their freedom, he asked for leave to go with it. This was granted to
him, and he was made one of the leaders.

![Martyred for praying °](assets/il074s.jpg "Martyred for praying °" class="center")

[Martyred for praying °](assets/il074x.jpg)

But alas! he went out to die. In one battle, a small band of the English
bravely attacked a large army of their enemies. The horse which Sidney
was riding was killed under him, and as he mounted another, he was shot
in the leg, and his thigh-bone was broken. The horse took fright and
galloped away from the fight, but its wounded and bleeding rider held
to his seat, and when he reached a place of safety was lifted from his
horse, and gently laid upon the ground. He was faint from loss of blood,
and in great pain, and his throat was parched with thirst.

"Bring me water," said he to a friend.

This was not easy to do, for there was not a stream near at hand, and in
order to get to one it would be necessary to pass where the shot from
the enemy's cannons was falling fast. But his friend was brave and went
through the danger. Then he found some water, and brought it to him.
Sidney eagerly held out his hand for the cup, and as he was preparing to
drink, another poor wounded soldier was carried past. This man was
dying; he could not speak, but he looked with longing eyes at the water.
Sir Philip saw the look, and taking the cup from his own lips, passed it
to the soldier, saying: "Thy need is greater than mine." The poor man
quenched his thirst, and blessed him as he died.

Sir Philip lived on for a few weeks, growing weaker every day, but he
never came back to his own land, and the many friends who loved him.

Sidney was great in many ways; very fair to see, very wise and good, and
very clever and witty. He was one of the bravest fighters, one of the
finest poets, and one of the best gentlemen who ever lived. He will
always be remembered for his brave deeds, and his wise sayings, but most
of all do men bless his name for this act of kindness to his poor dying
comrade.

![Sir Philip Sidney and the dying soldier](assets/il076s.jpg "Sir Philip Sidney and the dying soldier" class="center")

[Sir Philip Sidney and the dying soldier](assets/il076x.jpg)

----

"True Stories of Wonderful Deeds", by *Anonymous* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain. Illustration captions marked with ° are supplied. All other inconsistencies are as in the original.
