# CHAPTER V . THE EARTH AS A PLANET

### 44. THE SIZE OF THE EARTH

The student is presumed to have learned, in
his study of geography, that the earth is a globe about 8,000 miles in
diameter and, without dwelling upon the "proofs" which are commonly
given for these statements, we proceed to consider the principles upon
which the measurement of the earth's size and shape are based.

![FIG. 25.--Measuring the size of the earth.][fig25]
In Fig. 25 the circle represents a meridian section of the earth; `P P´`
is the axis about which it rotates, and the dotted lines represent a
beam of light coming from a star in the plane of the meridian, and so
distant that the dotted lines are all practically parallel to each
other. The several radii drawn through the points `1`, `2`, `3`,
represent the direction of the vertical at these points, and the angles
which these radii produced, make with the rays of starlight are each
equal to the angular distance of the star from the zenith of the place
at the moment the star crosses the meridian. We have already seen, in
[Chapter II](Chapter-II.md), how these angles may be measured, and it is apparent from
the figure that the difference between any two of these angles--e. g.,
the angles at `1` and `2`--is equal to the angle at the center, `O`,
between the points `1` and `2`. By measuring these angular distances of
the star from the zenith, the astronomer finds the angles at the center
of the earth between the stations `1`, `2`, `3`, etc., at which his
observations are made. If the meridian were a perfect circle the change
of zenith distance of the star, as one traveled along a meridian from
the equator to the pole, would be perfectly uniform--the same number of
degrees for each hundred miles traveled--and observations made in many
parts of the earth show that this is very nearly true, but that, on the
whole, as we approach the pole it is necessary to travel a little
greater distance than is required for a given change in the angle at the
equator. The earth is, in fact, flattened at the poles to the amount of
about 27 miles in the length of its diameter, and by this amount, as
well as by smaller variations due to mountains and valleys, the shape of
the earth differs from a perfect sphere. These astronomical measurements
of the curvature of the earth's surface furnish by far the most
satisfactory proof that it is very approximately a sphere, and furnish
as its equatorial diameter 7,926 miles.

Neglecting the _compression_, as it is called, i. e., the 27 miles by
which the equatorial diameter exceeds the polar, the size of the earth
may easily be found by measuring the distance `1`--`2` along the
surface and by combining with this the angle `1 O 2` obtained through
measuring the meridian altitudes of any star as seen from `1` and `2`.
Draw on paper an angle equal to the measured difference of altitude and
find how far you must go from its vertex in order to have the distance
between the sides, measured along an arc of a circle, equal to the
measured distance between `1` and `2`. This distance from the vertex
will be the earth's radius.

#### EXERCISE 19.
Measure the diameter of the earth by the method given
above. In order that this may be done satisfactorily, the two stations
at which observations are made must be separated by a considerable
distance--i. e., 200 miles. They need not be on the same meridian, but
if they are on different meridians in place of the actual distance
between them, there must be used the projection of that distance upon
the meridian--i. e., the north and south part of the distance.

By co-operation between schools in the Northern and Southern States,
using a good map to obtain the required distances, the diameter of the
earth may be measured with the plumb-line apparatus described in 
[Chapter II](Chapter-II.md) and determined within a small percentage of its true value.

### 45. THE MASS OF THE EARTH

We have seen in [Chapter IV](Chapter-IV.md) the possibility
of determining the masses of the planets as fractional parts of the
sun's mass, but nothing was there shown, or could be shown, about
measuring these masses after the common fashion in kilogrammes or tons.
To do this we must first get the mass of the earth in tons or
kilogrammes, and while the principles involved in this determination are
simple enough, their actual application is delicate and difficult.

![FIG. 26.--Illustrating the principles involved in weighing the earth.][fig26]
In Fig. 26 we suppose a long plumb line to be suspended above the
surface of the earth and to be attracted toward the center of the earth,
`C`, by a force whose intensity is ([Chapter IV](Chapter-IV.md))

\[F = k mE/R^{2}\]

where `E` denotes the mass of the earth, which is to be determined by
experiment, and `R` is the radius of the earth, 3,963 miles. If there is
no disturbing influence present, the plumb line will point directly
downward, but if a massive ball of lead or other heavy substance is
placed at one side, `1`, it will attract the plumb line with a force
equal to

\[f = k mB/r^{2}\]

where `r` is the distance of its center from the plumb bob and `B` is
its mass which we may suppose, for illustration, to be a ton. In
consequence of this attraction the plumb line will be pulled a little to
one side, as shown by the dotted line, and if we represent by `l` the
length of the plumb line and by `d` the distance between the original
and the disturbed positions of the plumb bob we may write the proportion

\[F : f :: l : d\]

and introducing the values of `F` and `f` given above, and solving for
`E` the proportion thus transformed, we find

\[E = B × l/d × (R/r)^{2}\]

In this equation the mass of the ball, `B`, the length of the plumb
line, `l`, the distance between the center of the ball and the center of
the plumb bob, `r`, and the radius of the earth, `R`, can all be
measured directly, and `d`, the amount by which the plumb bob is pulled
to one side by the ball, is readily found by shifting the ball over to
the other side, at `2`, and measuring with a microscope how far the
plumb bob moves. This distance will, of course, be equal to `2 d`.

By methods involving these principles, but applied in a manner more
complicated as well as more precise, the mass of the earth is found to
be, in tons, \(6,642 × 10^{18}\)--i. e., 6,642 followed by 18 ciphers, or in
kilogrammes \(60,258 × 10^{20}\). The earth's atmosphere makes up about a
millionth part of this mass.

If the length of the plumb line were 100 feet, the weight of the ball a
ton, and the distance between the two positions of the ball, `1` and
`2`, six feet, how many inches, `d`, would the plumb bob be pulled out
of place?

Find from the mass of the earth and the data of § 40 the mass of the sun
in tons. Find also the mass of Mars. The computation can be very greatly
abridged by the use of logarithms.

### 46. PRECESSION

That the earth is isolated in space and has no support
upon which to rest, is sufficiently shown by the fact that the stars are
visible upon every side of it, and no support can be seen stretching out
toward them. We must then consider the earth to be a globe traveling
freely about the sun in a circuit which it completes once every year,
and rotating once in every twenty-four hours about an axis which remains
at all seasons directed very nearly toward the star Polaris. The student
should be able to show from his own observations of the sun that, with
reference to the stars, the direction of the sun from the earth changes
about a degree a day. Does this prove that the earth revolves about the
sun?

But it is only in appearance that the pole maintains its fixed position
among the stars. If photographs are taken year after year, after the
manner of Exercise 7, it will be found that slowly the pole is moving
(nearly) toward Polaris, and making this star describe a smaller and
smaller circle in its diurnal path, while stars on the other side of the
pole (in right ascension 12h.) become more distant from it and describe
larger circles in their diurnal motion; but the process takes place so
slowly that the space of a lifetime is required for the motion of the
pole to equal the angular diameter of the full moon.

Spin a top and note how its rapid whirl about its axis corresponds to
the earth's diurnal rotation. When the axis about which the top spins is
truly vertical the top "sleeps"; but if the axis is tipped ever so
little away from the vertical it begins to wobble, so that if we imagine
the axis prolonged out to the sky and provided with a pencil point as a
marker, this would trace a circle around the zenith, along which the
pole of the top would move, and a little observation will show that the
more the top is tipped from the vertical the larger does this circle
become and the more rapidly does the wobbling take place. Were it not
for the spinning of the top about its axis, it would promptly fall over
when tipped from the vertical position, but the spin combines with the
force which pulls the top over and produces the wobbling motion. Spin
the top in opposite directions, with the hands of a watch and contrary
to the hands of a watch, and note the effect which is produced upon the
wobbling.

The earth presents many points of resemblance to the top. Its diurnal
rotation is the spin about the axis. This axis is tipped 23.5° away from
the perpendicular to its orbit (obliquity of the ecliptic) just as the
axis of the top is tipped away from the vertical line. In consequence of
its rapid spin, the body of the earth bulges out at the equator (27
miles), and the sun and moon, by virtue of their attraction (see 
[Chapter IV](Chapter-IV.md)), lay hold of this protuberance and pull it down toward the plane of
the earth's orbit, so that if it were not for the spin this force would
straighten the axis up and set it perpendicular to the orbit plane. But
here, as in the case of the top, the spin and the tipping force combine
to produce a wobble which is called precession, and whose effect we
recognize in the shifting position of the pole among the stars. The
motion of precession is very much slower than the wobbling of the top,
since the tipping force for the earth is relatively very small, and a
period of nearly 26,000 years is required for a complete circuit of the
pole about its center of motion. Friction ultimately stops both the spin
and the wobble of the top, but this influence seems wholly absent in the
case of the earth, and both rotation and precession go on unchanged from
century to century, save for certain minor forces which for a time
change the direction or rate of the precessional motion, first in one
way and then in another, without in the long run producing any results
of consequence.

The center of motion, about which the pole travels in a small circle
having an angular radius of 23.5°, is at that point of the heavens
toward which a perpendicular to the plane of the earth's orbit points,
and may be found on the star map in right ascension 18h. 0m. and
declination 66.5°.

#### EXERCISE 20.
Find this point on the map, and draw as well as you can
the path of the pole about it. The motion of the pole along its path is
toward the constellation Cepheus. Mark the position of the pole along
this path at intervals of 1,000 years, and refer to these positions in
dealing with some of the following questions:

Does the wobbling of the top occur in the same direction as the motion
of precession? Do the tipping forces applied to the earth and top act in
the same direction? What will be the polar star 12,000 years hence? The
Great Pyramid of Egypt is thought to have been used as an observatory
when Alpha Draconis was the bright star nearest the pole. How long ago
was that?

The motion of the pole of course carries the equator and the equinoxes
with it, and thus slowly changes the right ascensions and declinations
of all the stars. On this account it is frequently called the precession
of the equinoxes, and this motion of the equinox, slow though it is, is
a matter of some consequence in connection with chronology and the
length of the year.

Will the precession ever bring back the right ascensions and
declinations to be again what they now are?

In what direction is the pole moving with respect to the Big Dipper?
Will its motion ever bring it exactly to Polaris? How far away from
Polaris will the precession carry the pole? What other bright stars will
be brought near the pole by the precession?

### 47. THE WARMING OF THE EARTH

Winter and summer alike the day is on the
average warmer than the night, and it is easy to see that this surplus
of heat comes from the sun by day and is lost by night through radiation
into the void which surrounds the earth; just as the heat contained in a
mass of molten iron is radiated away and the iron cooled when it is
taken out from the furnace and placed amid colder surroundings. The
earth's loss of heat by radiation goes on ceaselessly day and night,
and were it not for the influx of solar heat this radiation would
steadily diminish the temperature toward what is called the "absolute
zero"--i. e., a state in which all heat has been taken away and beyond
which there can be no greater degree of cold. This must not be
confounded with the zero temperatures shown by our thermometers,
since it lies nearly 500° below the zero of the Fahrenheit scale (-273°
Centigrade), a temperature which by comparison makes the coldest winter
weather seem warm, although the ordinary thermometer may register
many degrees below its zero. The heat radiated by the sun into the
surrounding space on every side of it is another example of the same
cooling process, a hot body giving up its heat to the colder space about
it, and it is the minute fraction of this heat poured out by the sun,
and in small part intercepted by the earth, which warms the latter and
produces what we call weather, climate, the seasons, etc.

Observe the fluctuations, the ebb and flow, which are inherent in this
process. From sunset to sunrise there is nothing to compensate the
steady outflow of heat, and air and ground grow steadily colder, but
with the sunrise there comes an influx of solar heat, feeble at first
because it strikes the earth's surface very obliquely, but becoming more
and more efficient as the sun rises higher in the sky. But as the air
and the ground grow warm during the morning hours they part more and
more readily and rapidly with their store of heat, just as a steam pipe
or a cup of coffee radiates heat more rapidly when very hot. The warmest
hour of the day is reached when these opposing tendencies of income and
expenditure of heat are just balanced; and barring such disturbing
factors as wind and clouds, the gain in temperature usually extends to
the time--an hour or two beyond noon--at which the diminishing altitude
of the sun renders his rays less efficient, when radiation gains the
upper hand and the temperature becomes for a short time stationary, and
then commences to fall steadily until the next sunrise.

We have here an example of what is called a periodic change--i. e., one
which, within a definite and uniform period (24 hours), oscillates from
a minimum up to a maximum temperature and then back again to a minimum,
repeating substantially the same variation day after day. But it must be
understood that minor causes not taken into account above, such as
winds, water, etc., produce other fluctuations from day to day which
sometimes obscure or even obliterate the diurnal variation of
temperature caused by the sun.

Expose the back of your hand to the sun, holding the hand in such a
position that the sunlight strikes perpendicularly upon it; then turn
the hand so that the light falls quite obliquely upon it and note how
much more vigorous is the warming effect of the sun in the first
position than in the second. It is chiefly this difference of angle that
makes the sun's warmth more effective when he is high up in the sky than
when he is near the horizon, and more effective in summer than in
winter.

We have seen in [Chapter III](Chapter-III.md) that the sun's motion among the stars takes
place along a path which carries it alternately north and south of the
equator to a distance of 23.5°, and the stars show by their earlier
risings and later settings, as we pass from the equator toward the north
pole of the heavens, that as the sun moves northward from the equator,
each day in the northern hemisphere will become a little longer, each
night a little shorter, and every day the sun will rise higher toward
the zenith until this process culminates toward the end of June, when
the sun begins to move southward, bringing shorter days and smaller
altitudes until the Christmas season, when again it is reversed and the
sun moves northward. We have here another periodic variation, which runs
its complete course in a period of a year, and it is easy to see that
this variation must have a marked effect on the warming of the earth,
the long days and great altitudes of summer producing the greater warmth
of that season, while the shorter days and lower altitudes of December,
by diminishing the daily supply of solar heat, bring on the winter's
cold. The succession of the seasons, winter following summer and summer
winter, is caused by the varying altitude of the sun, and this in turn
is due to the obliquity of the ecliptic, or, what is the same thing, the
amount by which the axis of the earth is tipped from being perpendicular
to the plane of its orbit, and the seasons are simply a periodic change
in the warming of the earth, quite comparable with the diurnal change
but of longer period.

It is evident that the period within which the succession of winter and
summer is completed, the year, as we commonly call it, must equal the
time required by the sun to go from the vernal equinox around to the
vernal equinox again, since this furnishes a complete cycle of the sun's
motions north and south from the equator. On account of the westward
motion of the equinox (precession) this is not quite the same as the
time required for a complete revolution of the earth in its orbit, but
is a little shorter (20m. 23s.), since the equinox moves back to meet
the sun.

### 48. RELATION OF THE SUN TO CLIMATE

It is clear that both the northern
and southern hemispheres of the earth must have substantially the same
kind of seasons, since the motion of the sun north and south affects
both alike; but when the sun is north of the equator and warming our
hemisphere most effectively, his light falls more obliquely upon the
other hemisphere, the days there are short and winter reigns at the
time we are enjoying summer, while six months later the conditions are
reversed.

In those parts of the earth near the equator--the torrid zone--there is
no such marked change from cold to warm as we experience, because, as
the sun never gets more than 23.5° away from the celestial equator, on
every day of the year he mounts high in the tropic skies, always coming
within 23.5° of the zenith, and usually closer than this, so that there
is no such periodic change in the heat supply as is experienced in
higher latitudes, and within the tropics the temperature is therefore
both higher and more uniform than in our latitude.

In the frigid zones, on the contrary, the sun never rises high in the
sky; at the poles his greatest altitude is only 23.5°, and during the
winter season he does not rise at all, so that the temperature is here
low the whole year round, and during the winter season, when for weeks
or months at a time the supply of solar light is entirely cut off, the
temperature falls to a degree unknown in more favored climes.

If the obliquity of the ecliptic were made 10° greater, what would be
the effect upon the seasons in the temperate zones? What if it were made
10° less?

Does the precession of the equinoxes have any effect upon the seasons or
upon the climate of different parts of the earth?

If the axis of the earth pointed toward Arcturus instead of Polaris,
would the seasons be any different from what they are now?

### 49. THE ATMOSPHERE

Although we live upon its surface, we are not
outside the earth, but at the bottom of a sea of air which forms the
earth's outermost layer and extends above our heads to a height of many
miles. The study of most of the phenomena of the atmosphere belongs to
that branch of physics called meteorology, but there are a few matters
which fairly come within our consideration of the earth as a planet. We
can not see the stars save as we look through this atmosphere, and the
light which comes through it is bent and oftentimes distorted so as to
present serious obstacles to any accurate telescopic study of the
heavenly bodies. Frequently this disturbance is visible to the naked
eye, and the stars are said to twinkle--i. e., to quiver and change
color many times per second, solely in consequence of a disturbed
condition of the air and not from anything which goes on in the star.
This effect is more marked low down in the sky than near the zenith, and
it is worth noting that the planets show very little of it because the
light they send to the earth comes from a disk of sensible area, while a
star, being much smaller and farther from the earth, has its disk
reduced practically to a mere point whose light is more easily affected
by local disturbances in the atmosphere than is the broader beam which
comes from the planets' disk.

### 50. REFRACTION

At all times, whether the stars twinkle or not, their
light is bent in its passage through the atmosphere, so that the stars
appear to stand higher up in the sky than their true positions. This
effect, which the astronomer calls refraction, must be allowed for in
observations of the more precise class, although save at low altitudes
its amount is a very small fraction of a degree, but near the horizon it
is much exaggerated in amount and becomes easily visible to the naked
eye by distorting the disks of the sun and moon from circles into ovals
with their long diameters horizontal. The refraction lifts both upper
and lower edge of the sun, but lifts the lower edge more than the upper,
thus shortening the vertical diameter. See Fig. 27, which shows not only
this effect, but also the reflection of the sun from the curved surface
of the sea, still further flattening the image. If the surface of the
water were flat, the reflected image would have the same shape as the
sun's disk, and its altered appearance is sometimes cited as a proof
that the earth's surface is curved.

The total amount of the refraction at the horizon is a little more than
half a degree, and since the diameters of the sun and moon subtend an
angle of about half a degree, we have the remarkable result that in
reality the whole disk of either sun or moon is below the horizon at the
instant that the lower edge appears to touch the horizon and sunset or
moonset begins. The same effect exists at sunrise, and as a consequence
the duration of sunshine or of moonshine is on the average about six
minutes longer each day than it would be if there were no atmosphere and
no refraction. A partial offset to this benefit is found in the fact
that the atmosphere absorbs the light of the heavenly bodies, so that
stars appear much less bright when near the horizon than when they are
higher up in the sky, and by reason of this absorption the setting sun
can be looked at with the naked eye without the discomfort which its
dazzling luster causes at noon.

[![FIG. 27.--Flattening of the sun's disk by refraction and by reflection from the surface of the sea.][fig27]](assets/i103-full.jpg)

### 51. THE TWILIGHT

Another effect of the atmosphere, even more marked
than the preceding, is the twilight. As at sunrise the mountain top
catches the rays of the coming sun before they reach the lowland, and at
sunset it keeps them after they have faded from the regions below, so
the particles of dust and vapor, which always float in the atmosphere,
catch the sunlight and reflect it to the surface of the earth while the
sun is still below the horizon, giving at the beginning and end of day
that vague and diffuse light which we call twilight.

![FIG. 28.--Twilight phenomena.][fig28]
Fig. 28 shows a part of the earth surrounded by such a dust-laden
atmosphere, which is illuminated on the left by the rays of the sun, but
which, on the right of the figure, lies in the shadow cast by the earth.
To an observer placed at `1` the sun is just setting, and all the
atmosphere above him is illumined with its rays, which furnish a bright
twilight. When, by the earth's rotation, this observer has been carried
to `2`, all the region to the east of his zenith lies in the shadow,
while to the west there is a part of the atmosphere from which there
still comes a twilight, but now comparatively faint, because the lower
part of the atmosphere about our observer lies in the shadow, and it is
mainly its upper regions from which the light comes, and here the dust
and moisture are much less abundant than in the lower strata. Still
later, when the observer has been carried by the earth's rotation to the
point `3`, every vestige of twilight will have vanished from his sky,
because all of the illuminated part of the atmosphere is now below his
horizon, which is represented by the line `3 L`. In the figure the sun
is represented to be 78° below this horizon line at the end of twilight,
but this is a gross exaggeration, made for the sake of clearness in the
drawing--in fact, twilight is usually said to end when the sun is 18°
below the horizon.

Let the student redraw Fig. 28 on a large scale, so that the points `1`
and `3` shall be only 18° apart, as seen from the earth's center. He
will find that the point `L` is brought down much closer to the surface
of the earth, and measuring the length of the line `2 L`, he should find
for the "height of the atmosphere" about one-eightieth part of the
radius of the earth--i. e., a little less than 50 miles. This, however,
is not the true height of the atmosphere. The air extends far beyond
this, but the particles of dust and vapor which are capable of sending
sunlight down to the earth seem all to lie below this limit.

The student should not fail to watch the eastern sky after sunset, and
see the shadow of the earth rise up and fill it while the twilight arch
retreats steadily toward the west.

![FIG. 29.--The cause of long and short twilights.][fig29]

Duration of twilight
:   Since twilight ends when the sun is 18° below
    the horizon, any circumstance which makes the sun go down rapidly will
    shorten the duration of twilight, and anything which retards the
    downward motion of the sun will correspondingly prolong it. Chief among
    influences of this kind is the angle which the sun's course makes with
    the horizon. If it goes straight down, as at `a`, Fig. 29, a much
    shorter time will suffice to carry it to a depression of 18° than is
    needed in the case shown at `b` in the same figure, where the motion is
    very oblique to the horizon. If we consider different latitudes and
    different seasons of the year, we shall find every possible variety of
    circumstance from `a` to `b`, and corresponding to these, the duration
    of twilight varies from an all-night duration in the summers of Scotland
    and more northern lands to an hour or less in the mountains of Peru. For
    the sake of graphical effect, the shortness of tropical twilight is
    somewhat exaggerated by Coleridge in the lines,

:   >   "The sun's rim dips; the stars rush out:
         At one stride comes the dark."
        _The Ancient Mariner._

:   In the United States the longest twilights come at the end of June, and
    last for a little more than two hours, while the shortest ones are in
    March and September, amounting to a little more than an hour and a half;
    but at all times the last half hour of twilight is hardly to be
    distinguished from night, so small is the quantity of reflecting matter
    in the upper regions of the atmosphere. For practical convenience it is
    customary to assume in the courts of law that twilight ends an hour
    after sunset.
    
:   How long does twilight last at the north pole?

The Aurora
:   One other phenomenon of the atmosphere may be mentioned,
    only to point out that it is not of an astronomical character. The
    Aurora, or northern lights, is as purely an affair of the earth as is a
    thunderstorm, and its explanation belongs to the subject of terrestrial
    magnetism.

[fig25]: assets/i091.png "FIG. 25.--Measuring the size of the earth."
[fig26]: assets/i093.png "FIG. 26.--Illustrating the principles involved in weighing the earth."
[fig27]: assets/i103.jpg "FIG. 27.--Flattening of the sun's disk by refraction and by reflection from the surface of the sea."
[fig28]: assets/i104.png "FIG. 28.--Twilight phenomena."
[fig29]: assets/i105.png "FIG. 29.--The cause of long and short twilights."
