# CHAPTER IV . CELESTIAL MECHANICS

### 32. THE BEGINNINGS OF CELESTIAL MECHANICS

From the earliest dawn of
civilization, long before the beginnings of written history, the motions
of sun and moon and planets among the stars from constellation to
constellation had commanded the attention of thinking men, particularly
of the class of priests. The religions of which they were the guardians
and teachers stood in closest relations with the movements of the stars,
and their own power and influence were increased by a knowledge of them.

![ISAAC NEWTON (1643-1727).][img2]

Out of these professional needs, as well as from a spirit of scientific
research, there grew up and flourished for many centuries a study of the
motions of the planets, simple and crude at first, because the
observations that could then be made were at best but rough ones, but
growing more accurate and more complex as the development of the
mechanic arts put better and more precise instruments into the hands of
astronomers and enabled them to observe with increasing accuracy the
movements of these bodies. It was early seen that while for the most
part the planets, including the sun and moon, traveled through the
constellations from west to east, some of them sometimes reversed their
motion and for a time traveled in the opposite way. This clearly can not
be explained by the simple theory which had early been adopted that a
planet moves always in the same direction around a circular orbit having
the earth at its center, and so it was said to move around in a small
circular orbit, called an epicycle, whose center was situated upon
and moved along a circular orbit, called the deferent, within which the
earth was placed, as is shown in Fig. 18, where the small circle is the
epicycle, the large circle is the deferent, _P_ is the planet, and _E_
the earth. When this proved inadequate to account for the really
complicated movements of the planets, another epicycle was put on top of
the first one, and then another and another, until the supposed system
became so complicated that Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, repudiated
its fundamental theorem and taught that the motions of the planets take
place in circles around the sun instead of about the earth, and that the
earth itself is only one of the planets moving around the sun in its own
appropriate orbit and itself largely responsible for the seemingly
erratic movements of the other planets, since from day to day we see
them and observe their positions from different points of view.
![FIG. 18.--Epicycle and deferent.][fig18]

### 33. KEPLER'S LAWS

Two generations later came Kepler with his three
famous laws of planetary motion:

>   I. Every planet moves in an ellipse which has the sun at one of its foci.

>   II. The radius vector of each planet moves over equal areas in equal times.

>   III. The squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportional
    to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.

These laws are the crowning glory, not only of Kepler's career, but of
all astronomical discovery from the beginning up to his time, and they
well deserve careful study and explanation, although more modern
progress has shown that they are only approximately true.

#### EXERCISE 17.
Drive two pins into a smooth board an inch apart and
fasten to them the ends of a string a foot long. Take up the slack of
the string with the point of a lead pencil and, keeping the string drawn
taut, move the pencil point over the board into every possible position.
The curve thus traced will be an ellipse having the pins at the two
points which are called its foci.

In the case of the planetary orbits one focus of the ellipse is vacant,
and, in accordance with the first law, the center of the sun is at the
other focus. In Fig. 17 the dot, inside the orbit of Mercury, which is
marked `a`, shows the position of the vacant focus of the orbit of Mars,
and the dot `b` is the vacant focus of Mercury's orbit. The orbits of
Venus and the earth are so nearly circular that their vacant foci lie
very close to the sun and are not marked in the figure. The line drawn
from the sun to any point of the orbit (the string from pin to pencil
point) is a _radius vector_. The point midway between the pins is the
_center_ of the ellipse, and the distance of either pin from the center
measures the _eccentricity_ of the ellipse.

Draw several ellipses with the same length of string, but with the pins
at different distances apart, and note that the greater the eccentricity
the flatter is the ellipse, but that all of them have the same length.

If both pins were driven into the same hole, what kind of an ellipse
would you get?

The Second Law was worked out by Kepler as his answer to a problem
suggested by the first law. In Fig. 17 it is apparent from a mere
inspection of the orbit of Mercury that this planet travels much faster
on one side of its orbit than on the other, the distance covered in ten
days between the numbers 10 and 20 being more than fifty per cent
greater than that between 50 and 60. The same difference is found,
though usually in less degree, for every other planet, and Kepler's
problem was to discover a means by which to mark upon the orbit the
figures showing the positions of the planet at the end of equal
intervals of time. His solution of this problem, contained in the second
law, asserts that if we draw radii vectors from the sun to each of the
marked points taken at equal time intervals around the orbit, then the
area of the sector formed by two adjacent radii vectores and the arc
included between them is equal to the area of each and every other such
sector, the short radii vectores being spread apart so as to include a
long arc between them while the long radii vectores have a short arc. In
Kepler's form of stating the law the radius vector is supposed to travel
with the planet and in each day to sweep over the same fractional part
of the total area of the orbit. The spacing of the numbers in Fig. 17
was done by means of this law.

For the proper understanding of Kepler's Third Law we must note that the
"mean distance" which appears in it is one half of the long diameter of
the orbit and that the "periodic time" means the number of days or years
required by the planet to make a complete circuit in its orbit.
Representing the first of these by `a` and the second by `T`, we have,
as the mathematical equivalent of the law,

\[a^{3} รท T^{2} = C\]

where the quotient, `C`, is a number which, as Kepler found, is the same
for every planet of the solar system. If we take the mean distance of
the earth from the sun as the unit of distance, and the year as the unit
of time, we shall find by applying the equation to the earth's motion,
`C = 1`. Applying this value to any other planet we shall find in the
same units, \(a = T^{2/3}\), by means of which we may determine the
distance of any planet from the sun when its periodic time, `T`, has
been learned from observation.

#### EXERCISE 18.
Uranus requires 84 years to make a revolution in its
orbit. What is its mean distance from the sun? What are the mean
distances of Mercury, Venus, and Mars? (See [Chapter III](Chapter-III.md) for their
periodic times.) Would it be possible for two planets at different
distances from the sun to move around their orbits in the same time?

A circle is an ellipse in which the two foci have been brought together.
Would Kepler's laws hold true for such an orbit?

### 34. NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION

Kepler studied and described the motion of
the planets. Newton, three generations later (1727 A. D.), studied and
described the mechanism which controls that motion. To Kepler and his
age the heavens were supernatural, while to Newton and his successors
they are a part of Nature, governed by the same laws which obtain upon
the earth, and we turn to the ordinary things of everyday life as the
foundation of celestial mechanics.

Every one who has ridden a bicycle knows that he can coast farther upon
a level road if it is smooth than if it is rough; but however smooth and
hard the road may be and however fast the wheel may have been started,
it is sooner or later stopped by the resistance which the road and the
air offer to its motion, and when once stopped or checked it can be
started again only by applying fresh power. We have here a familiar
illustration of what is called

##### THE FIRST LAW OF MOTION

>   "Every body continues in its state of rest or
    of uniform motion in a straight line except in so far as it may be
    compelled by force to change that state."

A gust of wind, a stone, a
careless movement of the rider may turn the bicycle to the right or the
left, but unless some disturbing force is applied it will go straight
ahead, and if all resistance to its motion could be removed it would go
always at the speed given it by the last power applied, swerving neither
to the one hand nor the other.

When a slow rider increases his speed we recognize at once that he has
applied additional power to the wheel, and when this speed is slackened
it equally shows that force has been applied against the motion. It is
force alone which can produce a change in either velocity or direction
of motion; but simple as this law now appears it required the genius of
Galileo to discover it and of Newton to give it the form in which it is
stated above.

### 35. THE SECOND LAW OF MOTION

The second law of motion, which is also due to Galileo and Newton,
is:

>   "Change of motion is proportional to force applied and takes place in
    the direction of the straight line in which the force acts."

Suppose a
man to fall from a balloon at some great elevation in the air; his own
weight is the force which pulls him down, and that force operating at
every instant is sufficient to give him at the end of the first second
of his fall a downward velocity of 32 feet per second--i. e., it has
changed his state from rest, to motion at this rate, and the motion is
toward the earth because the force acts in that direction. During the
next second the ceaseless operation of this force will have the same
effect as in the first second and will add another 32 feet to his
velocity, so that two seconds from the time he commenced to fall he will
be moving at the rate of 64 feet per second, etc. The column of figures
marked `v` in the table below shows what his velocity will be at the end
of subsequent seconds. The changing velocity here shown is the change of
motion to which the law refers, and the velocity is proportional to the
time shown in the first column of the table, because the amount of force
exerted in this case is proportional to the time during which it
operated. The distance through which the man will fall in each second is
shown in the column marked `d`, and is found by taking the average of
his velocity at the beginning and end of this second, and the total
distance through which he has fallen at the end of each second, marked
`s` in the table, is found by taking the sum of all the preceding values
of `d`. The velocity, 32 feet per second, which measures the change of
motion in each second, also measures the _accelerating force_ which
produces this motion, and it is usually represented in formulรฆ by the
letter `g`. Let the student show from the numbers in the table that the
accelerating force, the time, `t`, during which it operates, and the
space, `s`, fallen through, satisfy the relation

\[s = 1/2 gt^{2},\]

which is usually called the law of falling bodies. How does the table
show that `g` is equal to 32?

[TABLE]
|_t_ |  _v_ |  _d_ |  _s_ |
|:--:|:----:|:----:|:----:|
|0   |   0  |   0  |   0  |
|1   |  32  |  16  |  16  |
|2   |  64  |  48  |  64  |
|3   |  96  |  80  | 144  |
|4   | 128  | 112  | 256  |
|5   | 160  | 144  | 400  |
|etc.| etc. | etc. | etc. |

If the balloon were half a mile high how long would it take to fall to
the ground? What would be the velocity just before reaching the ground?

[![GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642).][img3]](assets/i070-full.jpg)

Fig. 19 shows the path through the air of a ball which has been struck
by a bat at the point `A`, and started off in the direction `A B` with a
velocity of 200 feet per second. In accordance with the first law of
motion, if it were acted upon by no other force than the impulse given
by the bat, it should travel along the straight line `A B` at the
uniform rate of 200 feet per second, and at the end of the fourth second
it should be 800 feet from `A`, at the point marked 4, but during these
four seconds its weight has caused it to fall 256 feet, and its actual
position, 4', is 256 feet below the point 4. In this way we find its
position at the end of each second, 1', 2', 3', 4', etc., and drawing a
line through these points we shall find the actual path of the ball
under the influence of the two forces to be the curved line `A C`. No
matter how far the ball may go before striking the ground, it can not
get back to the point `A`, and the curve `A C` therefore can not be a
part of a circle, since that curve returns into itself. It is, in fact,
a part of a _parabola_, which, as we shall see later, is a kind of orbit
in which comets and some other heavenly bodies move. A skyrocket moves
in the same kind of a path, and so does a stone, a bullet, or any other
object hurled through the air.

![FIG. 19.--The path of a ball.][fig19]

### 36. THE THIRD LAW OF MOTION

>   "To every action there is always an equal
    and contrary reaction; or the mutual actions of any two bodies are
    always equal and oppositely directed."

This is well illustrated in the
case of a man climbing a rope hand over hand. The direct force or action
which he exerts is a downward pull upon the rope, and it is the reaction
of the rope to this pull which lifts him along it. We shall find in a
later chapter a curious application of this law to the history of the
earth and moon.

It is the great glory of Sir Isaac Newton that he first of all men
recognized that these simple laws of motion hold true in the heavens as
well as upon the earth; that the complicated motion of a planet, a
comet, or a star is determined in accordance with these laws by the
forces which act upon the bodies, and that these forces are essentially
the same as that which we call weight. The formal statement of the
principle last named is included in--

### 37. NEWTON'S LAW OF GRAVITATION

>   "Every particle of matter in the
    universe attracts every other particle with a force whose direction is
    that of a line joining the two, and whose magnitude is directly as the
    product of their masses, and inversely as the square of their distance
    from each other."

We know that we ourselves and the things about us are
pulled toward the earth by a force (weight) which is called, in the
Latin that Newton wrote, _gravitas_, and the word marks well the true
significance of the law of gravitation. Newton did not discover a new
force in the heavens, but he extended an old and familiar one from a
limited terrestrial sphere of action to an unlimited and celestial one,
and furnished a precise statement of the way in which the force
operates. Whether a body be hot or cold, wet or dry, solid, liquid, or
gaseous, is of no account in determining the force which it exerts,
since this depends solely upon mass and distance.

The student should perhaps be warned against straining too far the
language which it is customary to employ in this connection. The law of
gravitation is certainly a far-reaching one, and it may operate in every
remotest corner of the universe precisely as stated above, but
additional information about those corners would be welcome to
supplement our rather scanty stock of knowledge concerning what happens
there. We may not controvert the words of a popular preacher who says,
"When I lift my hand I move the stars in Ursa Major," but we should not
wish to stand sponsor for them, even though they are justified by a
rigorous interpretation of the Newtonian law.

The word _mass_, in the statement of the law of gravitation, means the
quantity of matter contained in the body, and if we represent by the
letters `mยด` and `mยดยด` the respective quantities of matter contained in
the two bodies whose distance from each other is `r`, we shall have, in
accordance with the law of gravitation, the following mathematical
expression for the force, `F`, which acts between them:

\[F = k (mยดmยดยด)/r^{2}\]

This equation, which is the general mathematical expression for the law
of gravitation, may be made to yield some curious results. Thus, if we
select two bullets, each having a mass of 1 gram, and place them so that
their centers are 1 centimeter apart, the above expression for the force
exerted between them becomes

\[F = k \{(1 ร 1)/1^{2}\} = k\]

from which it appears that the coefficient `k` is the force exerted
between these bodies. This is called the gravitation constant, and it
evidently furnishes a measure of the specific intensity with which one
particle of matter attracts another. Elaborate experiments which have
been made to determine the amount of this force show that it is
surprisingly small, for in the case of the two bullets whose mass of 1
gram each is supposed to be concentrated into an indefinitely small
space, gravity would have to operate between them continuously for more
than forty minutes in order to pull them together, although they were
separated by only 1 centimeter to start with, and nothing save their own
inertia opposed their movements. It is only when one or both of the
masses `mยด`, `mยดยด` are very great that the force of gravity becomes
large, and the weight of bodies at the surface of the earth is
considerable because of the great quantity of matter which goes to make
up the earth. Many of the heavenly bodies are much more massive than the
earth, as the mathematical astronomers have found by applying the law of
gravitation to determine numerically their masses, or, in more popular
language, to "weigh" them.

The student should observe that the two terms mass and weight are not
synonymous; mass is defined above as the quantity of matter contained in
a body, while weight is the force with which the earth attracts that
body, and in accordance with the law of gravitation its weight depends
upon its distance from the center of the earth, while its mass is quite
independent of its position with respect to the earth.

By the third law of motion the earth is pulled toward a falling body
just as strongly as the body is pulled toward the earth--i. e., by a
force equal to the weight of the body. How much does the earth rise
toward the body?

### 38. THE MOTION OF A PLANET

In Fig. 20 `S` represents the sun and `P` a
planet or other celestial body, which for the moment is moving along the
straight line `P 1`. In accordance with the first law of motion it would
continue to move along this line with uniform velocity if no external
force acted upon it; but such a force, the sun's attraction, is acting,
and by virtue of this attraction the body is pulled aside from the line
`P 1`.

Knowing the velocity and direction of the body's motion and the force
with which the sun attracts it, the mathematician is able to apply
Newton's laws of motion so as to determine the path of the body, and a
few of the possible orbits are shown in the figure where the short cross
stroke marks the point of each orbit which is nearest to the sun. This
point is called the _perihelion_.

Without any formal application of mathematics we may readily see that
the swifter the motion of the body at `P` the shorter will be the time
during which it is subjected to the sun's attraction at close range, and
therefore the force exerted by the sun, and the resulting change of
motion, will be small, as in the orbits `P 1` and `P 2`.

On the other hand, `P 5` and `P 6` represent orbits in which the
velocity at `P` was comparatively small, and the resulting change of
motion greater than would be possible for a more swiftly moving body.

What would be the orbit if the velocity at `P` were reduced to nothing
at all?

What would be the effect if the body starting at `P` moved directly away
from `1`?

![FIG. 20.--Different kinds of orbits.][fig20]
The student should not fail to observe that the sun's attraction tends
to pull the body at `P` forward along its path, and therefore increases
its velocity, and that this influence continues until the planet reaches
perihelion, at which point it attains its greatest velocity, and the
force of the sun's attraction is wholly expended in changing the
direction of its motion. After the planet has passed perihelion the
sun begins to pull backward and to retard the motion in just the same
measure that before perihelion passage it increased it, so that the
two halves of the orbit on opposite sides of a line drawn from the
perihelion through the sun are exactly alike. We may here note the
explanation of Kepler's second law: when the planet is near the sun it
moves faster, and the radius vector changes its direction more rapidly
than when the planet is remote from the sun on account of the greater
force with which it is attracted, and the exact relation between the
rates at which the radius vector turns in different parts of the orbit,
as given by the second law, depends upon the changes in this force.

When the velocity is not too great, the sun's backward pull, after a
planet has passed perihelion, finally overcomes it and turns the planet
toward the sun again, in such a way that it comes back to the point `P`,
moving in the same direction and with the same speed as before--i. e.,
it has gone around the sun in an orbit like `P 6` or `P 4`, an ellipse,
along which it will continue to move ever after. But we must not fail to
note that this return into the same orbit is a consequence of the last
line in the statement of the law of gravitation (p. 54), and that, if
the magnitude of this force were inversely as the cube of the distance
or any other proportion than the square, the orbit would be something
very different. If the velocity is too great for the sun's attraction to
overcome, the orbit will be a hyperbola, like `P 2`, along which the
body will move away never to return, while a velocity just at the limit
of what the sun can control gives an orbit like `P 3`, a parabola, along
which the body moves with _parabolic velocity_, which is ever
diminishing as the body gets farther from the sun, but is always just
sufficient to keep it from returning. If the earth's velocity could be
increased 41 per cent, from 19 up to 27 miles per second, it would have
parabolic velocity, and would quit the sun's company.

The summation of the whole matter is that the orbit in which a body
moves around the sun, or past the sun, depends upon its velocity and if
this velocity and the direction of the motion at any one point in the
orbit are known the whole orbit is determined by them, and the position
of the planet in its orbit for past as well as future times can be
determined through the application of Newton's laws; and the same is
true for any other heavenly body--moon, comet, meteor, etc. It is in
this way that astronomers are able to predict, years in advance, in what
particular part of the sky a given planet will appear at a given time.

It is sometimes a source of wonder that the planets move in ellipses
instead of circles, but it is easily seen from Fig. 20 that the planet,
`P`, could not by any possibility move in a circle, since the direction
of its motion at _P_ is not at right angles with the line joining it to
the sun as it must be in a circular orbit, and even if it were
perpendicular to the radius vector the planet must needs have exactly
the right velocity given to it at this point, since either more or less
speed would change the circle into an ellipse. In order to produce
circular motion there must be a balancing of conditions as nice as is
required to make a pin stand upon its point, and the really surprising
thing is that the orbits of the planets should be so nearly circular as
they are. If the orbit of the earth were drawn accurately to scale, the
untrained eye would not detect the slightest deviation from a true
circle, and even the orbit of Mercury (Fig. 17), which is much more
eccentric than that of the earth, might almost pass for a circle.

![FIG. 21. An impossible orbit.][fig21]
The orbit `P 2`, which lies between the parabola and the straight line,
is called in geometry a hyperbola, and Newton succeeded in proving from
the law of gravitation that a body might move under the sun's attraction
in a hyperbola as well as in a parabola or ellipse; but it must move in
some one of these curves; no other orbit is possible.[^1] Thus it would
not be possible for a body moving under the law of gravitation to
describe about the sun any such orbit as is shown in Fig. 21. If the
body passes a second time through any point of its orbit, such as `P` in
the figure, then it must retrace, time after time, the whole path that
it first traversed in getting from `P` around to `P` again--i. e., the
orbit must be an ellipse.

[^1]: The circle and straight line are considered to be special cases
of these curves, which, taken collectively, are called the conic
sections.

Newton also proved that Kepler's three laws are mere corollaries from
the law of gravitation, and that to be strictly correct the third law
must be slightly altered so as to take into account the masses of the
planets. These are, however, so small in comparison with that of the
sun, that the correction is of comparatively little moment.

### 39. PERTURBATIONS

In what precedes we have considered the motion of a
planet under the influence of no other force than the sun's attraction,
while in fact, as the law of gravitation asserts, every other body in
the universe is in some measure attracting it and changing its motion.
The resulting disturbances in the motion of the attracted body are
called _perturbations_, but for the most part these are insignificant,
because the bodies by whose disturbing attractions they are caused are
either very small or very remote, and it is only when our moving planet,
`P`, comes under the influence of some great disturbing power like
Jupiter or one of the other planets that the perturbations caused by
their influence need to be taken into account.

The problem of the motion of three bodies--sun, Jupiter, planet--which
must then be dealt with is vastly more complicated than that which we
have considered, and the ablest mathematicians and astronomers have not
been able to furnish a complete solution for it, although they have
worked upon the problem for two centuries, and have developed an immense
amount of detailed information concerning it.

[![THE LICK OBSERVATORY, MOUNT HAMILTON, CAL.][img4]](assets/i080-full.jpg)

In general each planet works ceaselessly upon the orbit of every other,
changing its size and shape and position, backward and forward in
accordance with the law of gravitation, and it is a question of serious
moment how far this process may extend. If the diameter of the earth's
orbit were very much increased or diminished by the perturbing action of
the other planets, the amount of heat received from the sun would be
correspondingly changed, and the earth, perhaps, be rendered unfit
for the support of life. The tipping of the plane of the earth's orbit
into a new position might also produce serious consequences; but the
great French mathematician of a century ago, Laplace, succeeded in
proving from the law of gravitation that although both of these changes
are actually in progress they can not, at least for millions of years,
go far enough to prove of serious consequence, and the same is true for
all the other planets, unless here and there an asteroid may prove an
exception to the rule.

![FIG. 22.--A planet subject to great perturbations by Jupiter.][fig22]
The precession ([Chapter V](Chapter-V.md)) is a striking illustration of a perturbation
of slightly different character from the above, and another is found in
connection with the plane of the moon's orbit. It will be remembered
that the moon in its motion among the stars never goes far from the
ecliptic, but in a complete circuit of the heavens crosses it twice,
once in going from south to north and once in the opposite direction.
The points at which it crosses the ecliptic are called the _nodes_, and
under the perturbing influence of the sun these nodes move westward
along the ecliptic about twenty degrees per year, an extraordinarily
rapid perturbation, and one of great consequence in the theory of
eclipses.

### 40. WEIGHING THE PLANETS

Although these perturbations can not be
considered dangerous, they are interesting since they furnish a method
for weighing the planets which produce them. From the law of gravitation
we learn that the ability of a planet to produce perturbations depends
directly upon its mass, since the force _F_ which it exerts contains
this mass, `mยด`, as a factor. So, too, the divisor \(r^{2}\) in the
expression for the force shows that the distance between the disturbing
and disturbed bodies is a matter of great consequence, for the smaller
the distance the greater the force. When, therefore, the mass of a
planet such as Jupiter is to be determined from the perturbations it
produces, it is customary to select some such opportunity as is
presented in Fig. 22, where one of the small planets, called asteroids,
is represented as moving in a very eccentric orbit, which at one point
approaches close to the orbit of Jupiter, and at another place comes
near to the orbit of the earth. For the most part Jupiter will not exert
any very great disturbing influence upon a planet moving in such an
orbit as this, since it is only at rare intervals that the asteroid and
Jupiter approach so close to each other, as is shown in the figure. The
time during which the asteroid is little affected by the attraction of
Jupiter is used to study the motion given to it by the sun's
attraction--that is, to determine carefully the undisturbed orbit in
which it moves; but there comes a time at which the asteroid passes
close to Jupiter, as shown in the figure, and the orbital motion which
the sun imparts to it will then be greatly disturbed, and when the
planet next comes round to the part of its orbit near the earth the
effect of these disturbances upon its apparent position in the sky will
be exaggerated by its close proximity to the earth. If now the
astronomer observes the actual position of the asteroid in the sky, its
right ascension and declination, and compares these with the position
assigned to the planet by the law of gravitation when the attraction of
Jupiter is ignored, the differences between the observed right
ascensions and declinations and those computed upon the theory of
undisturbed motion will measure the influence that Jupiter has had upon
the asteroid, and the amount by which Jupiter has shifted it, compared
with the amount by which the sun has moved it--that is, with the motion
in its orbit--furnishes the mass of Jupiter expressed as a fractional
part of the mass of the sun.

There has been determined in this manner the mass of every planet in the
solar system which is large enough to produce any appreciable
perturbation, and all these masses prove to be exceedingly small
fractions of the mass of the sun, as may be seen from the following
table, in which is given opposite the name of each planet the number by
which the mass of the sun must be divided in order to get the mass of
the planet:

|             |             |
|-------------|-------------|
|Mercury      |7,000,000 (?)|
|Venus        |  408,000    |
|Earth        |  329,000    |
|Mars         |3,093,500    |
|Jupiter      |    1,047.4  |
|Saturn       |    3,502    |
|Uranus       |   22,800    |
|Neptune      |   19,700    |

It is to be especially noted that the mass given for each planet
includes the mass of all the satellites which attend it, since their
influence was felt in the perturbations from which the mass was derived.
Thus the mass assigned to the earth is the combined mass of earth and
moon.

### 41. DISCOVERY OF NEPTUNE

The most famous example of perturbations is
found in connection with the discovery, in the year 1846, of Neptune,
the outermost planet of the solar system. For many years the motion of
Uranus, his next neighbor, had proved a puzzle to astronomers. In
accordance with Kepler's first law this planet should move in an ellipse
having the sun at one of its foci, but no ellipse could be found which
exactly fitted its observed path among the stars, although, to be sure,
the misfit was not very pronounced. Astronomers surmised that the small
deviations of Uranus from the best path which theory combined with
observation could assign, were due to perturbations in its motion
caused by an unknown planet more remote from the sun--a thing easy to
conjecture but hard to prove, and harder still to find the unknown
disturber. But almost simultaneously two young men, Adams in England and
Le Verrier in France, attacked the problem quite independently of each
other, and carried it to a successful solution, showing that if the
irregularities in the motion of Uranus were indeed caused by an unknown
planet, then that planet must, in September, 1846, be in the direction
of the constellation Aquarius; and there it was found on September 23d
by the astronomers of the Berlin Observatory whom Le Verrier had invited
to search for it, and found within a degree of the exact point which the
law of gravitation in his hands had assigned to it.

This working backward from the perturbations experienced by Uranus to
the cause which produced them is justly regarded as one of the greatest
scientific achievements of the human intellect, and it is worthy of note
that we are approaching the time at which it may be repeated, for
Neptune now behaves much as did Uranus three quarters of a century ago,
and the most plausible explanation which can be offered for these
anomalies in its path is that the bounds of the solar system must be
again enlarged to include another disturbing planet.

### 42. THE SHAPE OF A PLANET

There is an effect of gravitation not yet
touched upon, which is of considerable interest and wide application in
astronomy--viz., its influence in determining the shape of the heavenly
bodies. The earth is a globe because every part of it is drawn toward
the center by the attraction of the other parts, and if this attraction
on its surface were everywhere of equal force the material of the earth
would be crushed by it into a truly spherical form, no matter what may
have been the shape in which it was originally made. But such is not the
real condition of the earth, for its diurnal rotation develops in every
particle of its body a force which is sometimes called _centrifugal_,
but which is really nothing more than the inertia of its particles,
which tend at every moment to keep unchanged the direction of their
motion and which thus resist the attraction that pulls them into a
circular path marked out by the earth's rotation, just as a stone tied
at the end of a string and swung swiftly in a circle pulls upon the
string and opposes the constraint which keeps it moving in a circle. A
few experiments with such a stone will show that the faster it goes the
harder does it pull upon the string, and the same is true of each
particle of the earth, the swiftly moving ones near the equator having a
greater centrifugal force than the slow ones near the poles. At the
equator the centrifugal force is directly opposed to the force of
gravity, and in effect diminishes it, so that, comparatively, there is
an excess of gravity at the poles which compresses the earth along its
axis and causes it to bulge out at the equator until a balance is thus
restored. As we have learned from the study of geography, in the case of
the earth, this compression amounts to about 27 miles, but in the larger
planets, Jupiter and Saturn, it is much greater, amounting to several
thousand miles.

But rotation is not the only influence that tends to pull a planet out
of shape. The attraction which the earth exerts upon the moon is
stronger on the near side and weaker on the far side of our satellite
than at its center, and this difference of attraction tends to warp the
moon, as is illustrated in Fig. 23 where `1`, `2`, and `3` represent
pieces of iron of equal mass placed in line on a table near a horseshoe
magnet, `H`. Each piece of iron is attracted by the magnet and is held
back by a weight to which it is fastened by means of a cord running over
a pulley, `P`, at the edge of the table. These weights are all to be
supposed equally heavy and each of them pulls upon its piece of iron
with a force just sufficient to balance the attraction of the magnet for
the middle piece, No. `2`. It is clear that under this arrangement No.
`2` will move neither to the right nor to the left, since the forces
exerted upon it by the magnet and the weight just balance each other.
Upon No. `1`, however, the magnet pulls harder than upon No. `2`,
because it is nearer and its pull therefore more than balances the force
exerted by the weight, so that No. `1` will be pulled away from No. `2`
and will stretch the elastic cords, which are represented by the lines
joining `1` and `2`, until their tension, together with the force
exerted by the weight, just balances the attraction of the magnet. For
No. `3`, the force exerted by the magnet is less than that of the
weight, and it will also be pulled away from No. `2` until its elastic
cords are stretched to the proper tension. The net result is that the
three blocks which, without the magnet's influence, would be held close
together by the elastic cords, are pulled apart by this outside force as
far as the resistance of the cords will permit.

![FIG. 23.--Tide-raising forces.][fig23]

An entirely analogous set of forces produces a similar effect upon the
shape of the moon. The elastic cords of Fig. 23 stand for the attraction
of gravitation by which all the parts of the moon are bound together.
The magnet represents the earth pulling with unequal force upon
different parts of the moon. The weights are the inertia of the moon in
its orbital motion which, as we have seen in a previous section, upon
the whole just balances the earth's attraction and keeps the moon from
falling into it. The effect of these forces is to stretch out the
moon along a line pointing toward the earth, just as the blocks were
stretched out along the line of the magnet, and to make this diameter
of the moon slightly but permanently longer than the others.

##### THE TIDES
![FIG. 24.--The tides.][fig24]
Similarly the moon and the sun attract opposite sides of the
earth with different forces and feebly tend to pull it out of shape. But
here a new element comes into play: the earth turns so rapidly upon its
axis that its solid parts have no time in which to yield sensibly to the
strains, which shift rapidly from one diameter to another as different
parts of the earth are turned toward the moon, and it is chiefly the
waters of the sea which respond to the distorting effect of the sun's
and moon's attraction. These are heaped up on opposite sides of the
earth so as to produce a slight elongation of its diameter, and Fig. 24
shows how by the earth's rotation this swelling of the waters is swept
out from under the moon and is pulled back by the moon until it finally
takes up some such position as that shown in the figure where the effect
of the earth's rotation in carrying it one way is just balanced by the
moon's attraction urging it back on line with the moon. This heaping up
of the waters is called a _tide_. If `I` in the figure represents a
little island in the sea the waters which surround it will of course
accompany it in its diurnal rotation about the earth's axis, but
whenever the island comes back to the position `I`, the waters will
swell up as a part of the tidal wave and will encroach upon the land in
what is called high tide or flood tide. So too when they reach `Iยดยด`,
half a day later, they will again rise in flood tide, and midway between
these points, at `Iยด`, the waters must subside, giving low or ebb tide.

The height of the tide raised by the moon in the open sea is only a very
few feet, and the tide raised by the sun is even less, but along the
coast of a continent, in bays and angles of the shore, it often happens
that a broad but low tidal wave is forced into a narrow corner, and then
the rise of the water may be many feet, especially when the solar tide
and the lunar tide come in together, as they do twice in every month, at
new and full moon. Why do they come together at these times instead of
some other?

Small as are these tidal effects, it is worth noting that they may in
certain cases be very much greater--e. g., if the moon were as massive
as is the sun its tidal effect would be some millions of times greater
than it now is and would suffice to grind the earth into fragments.
Although the earth escapes this fate, some other bodies are not so
fortunate, and we shall see in later chapters some evidence of their
disintegration.

### 43. THE SCOPE OF THE LAW OF GRAVITATION

In all the domain of physical
science there is no other law so famous as the Newtonian law of
gravitation; none other that has been so dwelt upon, studied, and
elaborated by astronomers and mathematicians, and perhaps none that can
be considered so indisputably proved. Over and over again mathematical
analysis, based upon this law, has pointed out conclusions which, though
hitherto unsuspected, have afterward been found true, as when Newton
himself derived as a corollary from this law that the earth ought to be
flattened at the poles--a thing not known at that time, and not proved
by actual measurement until long afterward. It is, in fact, this
capacity for predicting the unknown and for explaining in minutest
detail the complicated phenomena of the heavens and the earth that
constitutes the real proof of the law of gravitation, and it is
therefore worth while to note that at the present time there are a very
few points at which the law fails to furnish a satisfactory account of
things observed. Chief among these is the case of the planet Mercury,
the long diameter of whose orbit is slowly turning around in a way for
which the law of gravitation as yet furnishes no explanation. Whether
this is because the law itself is inaccurate or incomplete, or whether
it only marks a case in which astronomers have not yet properly applied
the law and traced out its consequences, we do not know; but whether it
be the one or the other, this and other similar cases show that even
here, in its most perfect chapter, astronomy still remains an incomplete
science.

[img2]: assets/i062.jpg "ISAAC NEWTON (1643-1727)."
[img3]: assets/i070.jpg "GALILEO GALILEI (1564-1642)."
[img4]: assets/i080.jpg "THE LICK OBSERVATORY, MOUNT HAMILTON, CAL."

[fig18]: assets/i064.png "FIG. 18.--Epicycle and deferent."
[fig19]: assets/i072.png "FIG. 19.--The path of a ball."
[fig20]: assets/i076.png "FIG. 20.--Different kinds of orbits."
[fig21]: assets/i078.png "FIG. 21. An impossible orbit."
[fig22]: assets/i083.png "FIG. 22.--A planet subject to great perturbations by Jupiter."
[fig23]: assets/i087.png "FIG. 23.--Tide-raising forces."
[fig24]: assets/i088.png "FIG. 24.--The tides."
