## PREFACE

The present work is not a compendium of astronomy or an outline course
of popular reading in that science. It has been prepared as a text-book,
and the author has purposely omitted from it much matter interesting as
well as important to a complete view of the science, and has endeavored
to concentrate attention upon those parts of the subject that possess
special educational value. From this point of view matter which permits
of experimental treatment with simple apparatus is of peculiar value and
is given a prominence in the text beyond its just due in a well-balanced
exposition of the elements of astronomy, while topics, such as the
results of spectrum analysis, which depend upon elaborate apparatus, are
in the experimental part of the work accorded much less space than their
intrinsic importance would justify.

Teacher and student are alike urged to magnify the observational side of
the subject and to strive to obtain in their work the maximum degree of
precision of which their apparatus is capable. The instruments required
are few and easily obtained. With exception of a watch and a protractor,
all of the apparatus needed may be built by any one of fair mechanical
talent who will follow the illustrations and descriptions of the text.
In order that proper opportunity for observations may be had, the study
should be pursued during the milder portion of the year, between April
and November in northern latitudes, using clear weather for a direct
study of the sky and cloudy days for book work.

The illustrations contained in the present work are worthy of as careful
study as is the text, and many of them are intended as an aid to
experimental work and accurate measurement, e. g., the star maps, the
diagrams of the planetary orbits, pictures of the moon, sun, etc. If the
school possesses a projection lantern, a set of astronomical slides to
be used in connection with it may be made of great advantage, if the
pictures are studied as an auxiliary to Nature. Mere display and scenic
effect are of little value.

A brief bibliography of popular literature upon astronomy may be found
at the end of this book, and it will be well if at least a part of these
works can be placed in the school library and systematically used for
supplementary reading. An added interest may be given to the study if
one or more of the popular periodicals which deal with astronomy are
taken regularly by the school and kept within easy reach of the
students. From time to time the teacher may well assign topics treated
in these periodicals to be read by individual students and presented to
the class in the form of an essay.

The author is under obligations to many of his professional friends who
have contributed illustrative matter for his text, and his thanks are in
an especial manner due to the editors of the Astrophysical Journal,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, and Popular Astronomy for permission to
reproduce here plates which have appeared in those periodicals, and to
Dr. Charles Boynton, who has kindly read and criticised the proofs.

*GEORGE C. COMSTOCK.*

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, _February, 1901_.

----

"A Text-Book of Astronomy", by *George C. Comstock* from [The Project Gutenberg](http://www.gutenberg.org/).

Public domain.

